Welcome to the beginning of our module on limits.
We're going to start with the hardest thing.
We're going to talk about the epsilon delta definition of a limit.
This is a formal construction, meaning it's technical and abstract, but is
designed to make all the types of techniques we're going to use down the
road theoretically justified.
So what is a limit? Well, a limit is the central object in calculus.
We'll eventually focus on two notions in calculus.
We'll focus on derivatives, and integrals.
And both of them are going to be defined in terms of limits.
So in order to be able to do serious mathematics with derivatives and
integrals, we'll need to have some sort of understanding of limits.
At least in a conceptual level.
So the tool from which other fundamental definitions develop.
The limit is also important because it really forms a line in the sand.
Everything before the limit is generally considered to be basic.
So all the mathematics you've probably done up to this point, including
things like algebra, geometry, maybe even some statistics.
These are of course fundamental subjects, and by no means easy.
But there is a conceptual leap when you move towards using the limits.
With the limit so many more tools become available.
Because, due to its abstract definition, it really contains a lot of
information.
With limits you can do many different things.
So sometimes limits are considered the gateway to higher mathematics.
So what kinds of things will we say about limits? A typical statement
would be something like, a function f of x, you know, one we have in
mind, has a limit at sum point y.
So what am emphasizing here is that having a limit is a point­wise
definition.
Meaning, I say things about having limits at given input values, not about
the whole function having a limit.
It's just about what's happening in each individual point.
So for example, I can have a function with limits at certain points but not
at other points.
So let's look at the technical definition.
So, quite complicated­looking.
We say the limit is x goes to y of f of x equals L, if, for all epsilon, this is a
Greek letter, ep­si­lon, there exists some at delta, greater than zero, so
another Greek letter.
Such that, if x minus y is less than delta, then f of x minus L is less than
epsilon.
So what's going on here? I'm giving you a definition for a limit existing.
So we say that the limit is x goes to y if f of x equals L, if the following
conditions are satisfied.
What are these conditions? For every epsilon, there exists some delta,
such that if zero is less than x minus y less than delta, which just means x
is close to y because delta will be small, then f of x minus L is less than
epsilon.
This means f of x is close to L.
The deltas and epsilons when they have particular values tell you how
close they have to be.
But essentially what this is saying is that, if x and y are close together and
not equal, then f of x minus the limit is also close together.
So let's draw a picture.
So here are my y and x axes.
So I should say the y and the limit definition is different than the y axis
here.
And I draw some function, and I pick a point.
The limit definition, let's call this, say, c.
So I ask the limit is x goes to c, of f of x equals L.
So what does this mean visually? It means that if I'm close by c on the x
axis, the corresponding f values should be close to L.
So here is c minus delta, and c plus delta.
So this is referring to that interval zero less than x minus y less than delta.
Then when I look at the corresponding outputs, they fall in this little
epsilon neighborhood, L minus epsilon, L plus epsilon.
So small perturbations on the input lead to small perturbations around the
limit.
All the epsilon delta definition does is formalize this.
And say, how do I actually write this intuitive idea down mathematically?
So one remark I want to make is about this sign here.
In some cases you might think that this is unnecessary.
All this does is say that x does not equal y.
Right, because the only way x minus y in absolute value is equal to zero,
is if x equals y.
So I don't require that the value of f at y is equal to L.
That's not necessary.
In fact, if that is the case, then I get what's called a, well I mean you could
say that this is somehow obvious, right, so that's why you see this
definition the way it is.
So I want to make a remark here that this picture is maybe not the most
representative of, of functions of interest, because this is a continuous
function.
Which is a case in which, all of the limits exist and are equal to the
function's values at that point.
So there'll be more interesting examples we look at where functions may
not have limits, or have limits that are different than the function's value.
So as a first remark, the limit does not need to exist.
In these cases we say, the limit DNE, does not exist.
We'll see some examples of this in sub­module 1.2.
And I'll remark again, the special case when f of x exists and is equal to
the limit as y goes to x of f of y, is special.
This is called being continuous.
Continuous functions are the functions for which we basically can do
calculus.
So we'll discuss this notion in more detail in sub­module 1.3.
Now, one comforting remark I want to make is that, although this epsilon
delta definition is very technical and abstract, it's not really incredibly
necessary for what we are doing on the CLEP exam.
The epsilon delta definition is important historically.
It wasn't formalized until the end of the 1800's, which is over 200 years
since the start of calculus.
So people had been doing calculus for quite some time, and had gotten
very important scientific results in, for example, physics, using the
techniques of calculus.
All without the epsilon delta definition.
They didn't really need this.
The only reason it was brought up was to put mathematics on a firm
philosophical ground.
People were running into strange theoretical issues with calculus.
Hence, they needed to define everything very clearly, so that they could
really understand what kinds of mistakes they were making.
And that was when the epsilon delta definition was born.
So it's really a very modern mathematical construction, and is much more
modern than most of the things we'll see in this course, which are
classical results of calculus.
And in particular are quite old.
So, what do we need to do instead of the epsilon delta definition? One of
the more important tools for limits is visualization.
Which means to plot the function.
If you can plot the function, you can make good guesses about what the
types of limit behavior are, without having to get your hands super dirty by
messing around with the epsilons and deltas in this definition.
However, it is an important mark of mathematical development to see the
epsilon delta definition for the first time.
It's tough, for sure, but it's actually very beautiful.
And you may not appreciate this until you've studied it two, three, four,
five times.
I didn't understand the definition really until my fourth time studying
calculus.
And at that point I could understand what types of behavior it's really
capturing.
So if you don't understand it the first time, It's not the most important thing
for the CLEP exam.
But it is important to think about it a little bit, so that when you see it
again, which, you inevitably will, if you stay studying mathematics, it
becomes clearer.
And then on the third time it becomes clearer still.
