Alright, so we got through the hardest part of limits.
We've talked about the epsilon­delta definition.
Now things get a lot more fun because we actually get to sort of get our
hands a little bit dirty by drawing some pictures and try and build up our
intuition of what limits we're actually doing.
Now, I have to remark of course that computing limits can be easy or
hard.
I could give you a question that's extremely difficult, even for a tenured
math professor at Harvard or I could give you one that's extremely easy.
There's a very large spectrum of difficulty for these questions.
Of course for the CLEP exam we'll be testing basic knowledge.
Do you understand your fundamentals? The key thing to understand is
what the epsilon­delta definition gets at is a limit captures what a function
looks like around a point rather than at the point, right? The epsilon­delta
definition just said what happens sort of nearby the point.
I never actually checked the function's value which is why you can end up
with something that really breaks our intuition.
A function like this for example.
More or less the same type of pathological example that I gave in the
previous sub module.
This has a limit.
So, let's call this point Y.
Wait, what is that limit? Well, it's this value.
The sort of empty circle there is the limit value because if I look around
that point that's what my function is moving towards.
It's only once I get to the point when I'm actually sitting where the limit
ought to be that I realize I have a problem.
Only the do I see the function's value is different from the limit.
So, one way to think about limits is imagine you're sitting on this function
and you start walking towards Y.
You expect to get there if there's a limit.
I expect to have no problem as I move this way.
Everything looks like I'm going to get to this value and then boom, as
soon as I get there I realize it's gone.
Same if I come from this side.
When I had these sort of little arrows on the function I'm emphasizing the
fact that I need to have the right behavior from the left side and the right
side, and there is a notion of left and right limit that I'm not going to
discuss in this course.
It's just a slight refinement of the definition I gave previously, and it's more
significant in proof­based classes in my opinion.
For us, we'll be fine with the definition we have.
So, to compute limits what sort of guiding principles can you have? Well,
you can always go to the definition.
You can always try and prove a limit exists by showing the epsilon­delta
definition is satisfied but I'm sure you appreciate the fact that this is tricky.
It's much easier to try and understand the function by graphing it, for
example, or using your knowledge of how certain types of functions
behave.
So, what we'll do now is look at just a handful of basic examples and I'll
sketch some different techniques you can use to be able to compute
limits associated with these functions.
This is not an exhaustive list.
There are many different types of techniques you can use.
The only way to understand these is to do many exercises.
When I first studied limits I did probably 200 exercises over the course of
about one month.
They ranged from exercises that took 15 seconds to ones that took 10
minutes.
The only way I was able to understand these tools is through practice.
We're not going to do 200 together.
I'm going to show you just a few representative ones but I highly
recommend finding some exercises to do from our suggested readings.
So, here's a nice basic one.
I wanna compute the limit as X goes to zero of the function X plus one
quantity squared.
So, here F of X is equal to X plus one squared.
So, what do I know about this function? It's polynomial and in fact it's a
quadratic.
So, how do I plot this guy? Well, I have X plus one squared, so it'll shift F
of X equals X squared to the left by one.
So, the picture is something like this.
So, I ask is anything strange going on here? If I follow the path towards
zero from the left and I follow it towards zero from the right, do I get the
same thing and what is that? Well, if I follow things from the left it sure
looks like I'm gonna get to F of zero which is one.
If I follow it from the right I get the same thing.
So, this is equal to zero plus one squared, so one squared so one.
So, I wanted to make a remark here was that this was too easy.
All I had to do was plug in X equals zero and then evaluate the function.
In general, evaluating the function is not the same as computing the limit.
They're only the same when I have a continuous function.
So, this only worked because F of X was continuous at X equals zero
which meant F of zero was equal to the limit as X goes to zero of F of X.
So, when I have a continuous function evaluating the limit very easy.
All I have to do is plug in the value I'm interested in.
How did I know this function was continuous? I mean, that's something
that I just knew.
I knew that all polynomials are continuous functions.
We'll get to this in 1.3 but at some point you just have to remember what
types of functions are continuous.
Again, in a more sophisticated class you might prove that every
polynomial is continuous.
It would be a lot of work but then you would understand exactly why this
is true.
So, here's a trickier one and perhaps one that's more representative of
what's happening.
I want to evaluate this rational function that is a ratio of two polynomials at
negative one.
So, what happens here? Well, let's try to plug in and I get minus one
squared plus two times minus one plus one over minus one plus one
which works out to zero over zero.
Now, this is bad.
This is what's called an indeterminate form, zero over zero.
What do I mean by that? Well, what I mean is that zero over zero has
essentially no meaning.
In different contexts limits that get you to zero over zero could be
anything.
They could be zero, one, infinity or anything in between.
It cannot be determined what zero over zero means without additional
context, hence the term indeterminate form.
There various other indeterminate forms.
Things like zero to the infinity or infinity divided by infinity or one to the
infinity.
All of these indeterminate forms have different tricks to understanding
them but we won't study them in too much detail.
I should stop.
Zero to the infinity is determinate but one to the infinity is not.
Again, this is something that you could do many different exercises in and
see how they come up but we'll focus just on zero over zero for right now.
So, what can I do to alleviate this problem? Well, what does it mean if a
polynomial evaluates to zero? Well, it means it has a root at that value, so
what it means is that the top, I can factor out an X plus one.
So, I'll do this.
So, I can factor this as X plus one times, let's see here, X plus one.
And I have this.
And now I can cancel these out.
Now, this cancellation is valid except when, when would it not be okay to
cancel these things out? Well, if the things I cancel out are zero I have a
problem.
When does that happen? It's when X equals minus one.
So, you might say well, this isn't fair.
How can I cancel them out? I'm interested in the limit as X goes to minus
one and at X equals minus one there's zero so I have an issue.
But no because remember, the limit doesn't care about what happens at
the point.
It only cares about what's happening nearby the point.
So, in this case everything is fine because as long as I'm not equal to
minus one I don't have an issue with dividing by zero.
So, I end up with what? Limit as X goes to minus one of X plus one.
Okay? And now I can just plug in, this is easy, this is minus one plus one,
so zero.
Okay? So, this is not too difficult.
All we had to do is recognize that when I get zero over zero I need to do
some factoring.
So, let's look at the same function but evaluate it at a different point.
So, here I'll have no problems.
In this case I can just plug in because X squared plus two X plus one over
X plus one is continuous at X equals one.
Okay? So, in this case I just get one squared plus two times one plus one
over one plus one, so four over two, so two.
Okay, so no problems here.
So, the difficulty with evaluating the limit came in because that function
wasn't discontinuous at minus one, or appeared discontinuous.
So, when I wanted to evaluate the limit at minus I couldn't just plug in, I
got zero over zero.
In this case plugging in is fine because I'm continuous there.
So, let's look at another example.
So, here I have the function F of X equals one over X.
Let's plot it.
So, what's happening as X goes to zero? Well, I'm moving this way.
So, from the right­hand side I'm blowing up to positive infinity, and from
the left­hand side I'm blowing up to minus infinity.
So, depending from which side you're coming in I go to plus or minus
infinity which implies the limit does not exist or you could write DNE.
So, this is an example of function, at a limit at a given point does not exist
and it's an important one to recognize because it's very basic.
It's just one over X.
This function does not have a limit at X equals zero.
So, let's look at one more and for this one we can also do some algebra.
So, again we try to plug in and I get square root of zero to the fourth plus
zero squared over zero which is zero over zero which is indeterminate.
So again, I'm in a bit of trouble here.
I've an indeterminate form.
So, how can I actually compute the limit? Well, I can do a bit of algebra,
right? I can say that this is equal to the limit as X goes to zero or let's say
the factor at an absolute value, right, let's say square root of X squared
times square root of X squared plus one, divided by X.
Is that okay? Right? So, what is the square root of X squared? Well, it's
not X, it's the absolute value of X.
So, I end up with this and now we have to think for a moment.
So, what's happening with this limit here? Well, what's the absolute value
of X over X? Well, for positive values of X it'll be equal to one because in
that case the absolute value of X is equal to X but for negative values of X
absolute value of X is still positive so we'll end up with minus one.
So, what's happening with this object as X goes towards zero? Well, it's
not going to have a limit because if I come in from the right I'll have
positive one and if I come in from the left I'll have negative one.
Now, this fellow here is no problem.
If I plug in X equals zero what do I get? Well, I just get one.
So, this is equal to the limit as X goes to zero of absolute value X over X
times one but this guy does not exist, so the whole limit does not exist.
So, in this case I had nonexistence of the limit for a more complicated
reason which was that I ended up with a function that didn't blow up to
plus or minus infinity but that had strange behavior with regard to the
absolute value function.
So, this is another pathology you should keep in mind.
Absolute value X over X doesn't have a limit because from one side it's
positive one, from another side it's negative one.
