In this sub module we're gonna get into the details of something we've
already alluded to several times.
Which is the notion of continuity.
So, what is continuity? It's a mathematical way of quantifying what is a
nice function? Intuitively, continuous functions are the ones that behave
well with respect to plotting.
That is, if I try and plot them, nothing too crazy happens.
I don't have any big, you know, asymptotes or strange places where the
function's value isn't what I expect.
So what we'll do in this sub module is state the definition formally, which
will be in terms of limits.
Then we'll give some intuitive definition, not really definitions but intuitive
ways to think about it that are, maybe more convenient, especially on a
timed environment like the CLEP where that you can't necessarily
necessarily sit around computing every limit.
And then we'll look at some specific examples and analyze their
continuity.
So what kind of question does continuity answer? It answers the question
of, to compute a limit, is it the same as evaluating the function? So,
question.
When does the limit as x goes to c of f of x equal f of c? Answer.
When f is continuous at c.
Now this is a little bit tautological because I'm going to define continuity to
be exactly when this happens.
But that's the intuition we're trying to develop.
The limit behavior sort of tells you what's happening nearby the point.
And that f of c is the value at the point.
When are those in agreement? That's when they're continuous.
So the formal definition, or technical, is f is continuous out of point x if the
limit is y goes to x, then f of y equals f of x.
So, basically, I'm continuous at a point if my limit and my functions value
agree at that point.
So, visually, this would not be a continuous function.
Because the limit is here and the functions value is here.
So they do not agree, therefore, not continuous.
So that's the technical definition.
Mathematicians love it, I love it.
Not always the most useful thing in the world.
So what's an intuition here? What can we do instead of getting dirty with
this definition? We can try and think about it in a less abstract way, and
say a continuous function is one in which I can draw without lifting my
pen.
This isn't really true.
There are plenty of continuous functions that you would have a hard time
drawing without lifting your pen.
But it gets the idea down.
The types of things we're avoiding by looking at continuous functions are
big jumps, for example.
Or places like, for the function I just drew, where I have to stop drawing
and jump down to fill in a dot then go back and continue.
Another technical def, note, sometimes people talk about having a
function be continuous without respect to a given point.
So a function is continuous if it is continuous at every point.
Okay, so in other words, one, the limit exists at every input.
Two, the function agrees with all these limits.
So let's again, let's look at a couple examples.
So here I have a continuous function.
Or certainly what looks to be a continuous function.
It looks like I can certainly draw this without lifting my pen.
Now over here, on the right, clearly I have a discontinuity here.
So I have one discontinuity which implies the function is discontinuous.
Now there are plenty of points for which this function is continuous.
Basically everywhere else it looks like it's a contin, it looks like the
function is continuous.
But because there's one point at which it is not continuous, the whole
function is said to be discontinuous.
So, really, the function needs to be well­behaved everywhere in order for
you to call it a continuous function.
So let's look at just some examples now to understand continuity a bit
better.
So I'm gonna give some examples of functions.
And we're gonna discuss whether they're continuous or not.
So here's one we've kind of seen before.
F of x equals one over x, if x does not equal zero.
And then I'm going to give it a value at zero.
Now, why do I have to make this, sort of, piecewise definition? Well, what
happens if I try to plug in x equals zero into whatever x? I get infinity or
minus infinity, or something bad.
So I need to give the function a value at x equals zero.
So what's the picture? Something like this, and then I also have that
value.
So the function is defined for all number, all real numbers.
Is it continuous? Well.
Does it look like it? Can I draw this without lifting my pen? Well, no.
And in fact, clearly the only issue is going to be at x equals zero.
So I'll say clearly issue at x equals zero.
So I check.
F of zero equals the limit as x goes to zero f of x.
This is what I would need to have happen to have continuity at zero.
So is it true? Well this equal to zero because of this statement here.
But what about the limit? Well, we saw in the previous sub module this
does not exist.
So I have a discontinuity at x equals zero.
Every other point is okay.
We're not going to show this but I think it's clear that I'm continuous
everywhere else.
But at x equals zero, I'm discontinuous and hence the whole function is
discontinuous.
Now, an important question to ask is what if I had set the value at x
equals zero to be something else? To be one or negative five or
something? That would still not solve the problem.
Because the lit as x goes to zero, doesn't exist.
So there's no way to, sort of, plug the gap here.
This function is, sort of, fundamentally flawed from the standpoint of
calculus.
I just can't make it continuous.
I don't know how to fix this problem.
There are more sophisticated techniques that can be done.
But for us this is about as bad as it's gonna get.
So here's another piecewise definition.
For x less than or equal to one, I'll have two x plus one.
If x is greater than one, the rule will be three x squared.
So let's plot this.
So let's start with two x plus one.
So at zero, that's equal to one.
One of these at three.
So it's, maybe, something like this.
So that's the first half of my function.
And then, for x greater than one, I take on the value three x squared.
So it looks something like this maybe.
So not, your kind of usual function you might have seen in pre calculus.
I have two different behaviors depending on if I'm greater than one or less
than or equal to one.
But is it continuous? Can I draw this without lifting my pen? The answer is
yes.
The functions value is cl, sorry, again, I'll say that clearly the issue would
be at one.
But is it a real issue? Well, does f of one equal the limit as x goes to one
of f of x? This is the golden question here.
Well f of one is equal to three.
What happens as I come in from the left, here? Well this guy gives me
three.
So I'm good on that side.
How 'bout here? What happens if I come in from the right? Well what is
the limit as x goes to one of three x squared, which is equal to three? So I
end up with three on the right as well.
So this is equal to three.
So I'm continuous at x equals one.
And everything else is no problem.
So, in fact, I am a continuous function.
So this is an important example to understand that.
Just because I have a piecewise definition, which is referring to these
braces, here.
What I define the function to be one way for certain inputs and another for
other inputs.
If I have a piecewise definition, these are classic examples where the
function may be discontinuous.
But they don't have to be.
If I put the two pieces together correctly they sync up at the point of
intersection and I get a continuous function.
So it's really important to not just assume that piecewise function will be
discontinuous.
You really have to look at what's happening at this intersection or
connection value.
And only after you've done that kind of analysis can you make
conclusions about continuity.
Alright, so we've had some fun.
We've drawn some plots.
What can I say for sure in terms of continuity? What types of things
should you commit to memory? Well, the following things are very helpful.
Polynomials, exponentials, sine and cosine are all continuous.
So anytime you have questions about limits involving sine, cosine,
exponential polynomials, those are non, not serious questions.
You don't have to do anything.
They're continuous.
So just plug in the value to the function.
They're equal to the limit because it's continuous.
So what kinds of other things can you say? Well.
Rational functions, so this is something like p of x over q of x for
polynomials p and q.
These are gonna be continuous except when the denominator is zero.
Because that's why in potentially you're gonna divide by zero so either I'm
gonna blow up to infinity like I did with one over x.
Or, if you remember from the previous example, I'm sorry, the previous
sub module.
I can have division by zero that actually has a limit.
Because I factor something out the top and bottom.
And the problem goes away.
Now, one other function we might encounter is the logarithm.
Now this is continuous because its domain is only zero to infinity.
So even though it's sort of blows up as you go towards zero, the function
isn't even defined at x equals zero.
So I would say that this function is continuous everywhere.
It just has a restricted domain.
So what does that leave us in terms of our favorite functions? What types
of things would, can we say for sure are discontinuous? Well, tangent, for
one.
The tangent function as, you know, we'll be able to refresh ourselves
down the road, has discontinuities at pi over two, three pi over two, five pi
over two; et cetera.
Generally pi over two plus an integer multiple of pi.
And there's no way to get around that discontinuity.
Because I blow up to infinity or minus infinity there.
Also, the remaining trig functions.
Cotangent, secant, cosecant.
These are all examples of discontinuous functions.
We'll see more down the road, but it may be it's helpful to say take your
standard functions and divide them into two groups.
The continuous ones and the discontinuous ones.
The continuous ones are the good guys.
These are the ones that are easy to draw, easier, and that I can do
calculus with.
Or at least I have a hope of doing calculus with without having to do some
sort of crazy surgery on the function ahead of time.
The discontinuous ones are much more delicate.
And you usually wind up restricting the domain so that the function is
continuous on that domain.
But we'll go into details when we get there.

