We will conclude our study of limits with something a little bit special.
We're going to introduce a technique that's useful for computing
essentially one very specific but important limit.
It has other applications, but it's almost always motivated the same way.
It's called the Squeeze Theorem.
So, there are no one­size­fits­all methods for computing limits.
We've seen many different techniques: factoring, noticing properties of
absolute value, plotting functions and evaluating them when possible,
ascertaining the behavior geometrically, and there are many more we
could get into.
So having more tools in our arsenal is very helpful, because every
problem can potentially be different than the one that came before.
So one technique that is incredibly useful and is really, kind of basic
principle in mathematics is to take one problem and compare it to
something else.
Maybe the problem I'm looking at right now is very confusing to me, but
it's somehow related by an analogy to another problem that I know how to
solve.
So if I can somehow take that solution and apply it to my new one, then I
could potentially make progress.
And this is the basic idea behind what's called the Squeeze Theorem.
Why is it called "Squeeze"? Well, what I'm going to do is take a function
whose limit I want to evaluate and compare it to two other functions: one
that's smaller than it, and one that's bigger than it.
Hopefully, I can study the limits of those functions, then the Squeeze
Theorem tells me how I can study the limit of the function squeezed in­
between.
So here's one way of writing it.
So suppose I have three functions: g, f, and h.
Now g is the one I care about, so this is my function, and I need to find g.
I need to find h.
But the theorem says suppose that g is less than or equal to f, which is
less than or equal to h on some interval containing y.
So for example...
You know...
Maybe ­1,1 and the point of interest is 0.
So I need to have this inequality on some interval containing the point of
interest.
Then if this is true, I can basically take the string of inequalities and just
throw some limits on it.
The limit as x goes to y of g of x is less than or equal to the limit as x goes
to y of f of x, which is less than or equal to the limit as x goes to y of h of
x.
So I just took the first line and threw some limits on.
So the picture is not too bad.
So I'll draw my three functions in three different colors.
Here's y...
So let's make this h.
Let's make this f.
And we can make this g.
So the power of the Squeeze Theorem is when you have f sandwiched
between h and g, but that they all agree at the limit of value y.
Because then the hypotheses of the theorem are satisfied and then I can
apply the conclusion, which is that the limits also satisfy this inequality.
If the limit on the left and on the right in the stream of inequalities are
equal, they have to be equal to the one in the middle.
Hence I can determine the limit as x goes to y of f of x through these
other two limits, which are hopefully easier to compute.
Now we're not gonna prove this.
Really, we're not gonna prove anything in this course.
That would typically be done in a proof­based calculus class.
We'd really understand why the Squeeze Theorem is true.
We're gonna sketch how to apply it to a very classic limit: the limit as x
goes to 0 of sin(x) over x.
Alright, so just by plugging in, I get nowhere.
I get sin(0) over 0, so 0 over 0, which is indeterminate.
So, not surprisingly, if it's an interesting problem, I can't do the simple
thing.
I can't just plug in x equals 0.
I need to do something more sophisticated.
Alright, so just to summarize, direct substitution, i.e.
plugging in...
fails.
I mean, generally you should be wary of plugging in.
It only works if you're continuous.
And if I just give you some formula for a function and it doesn't fit into,
say, a polynomial regime or exponential, you don't know if it's continuous
or not.
So you really have no reason to suspect that plugging in will do anything.
So a cool exercise, which can be done using just geometry...
I will not sketch it, but if you Google this, there's a million different sort of
proof sketches.
You can show that sin(x) over x is bounded by 1 above and cosine below.
So this is playing the role of like, f of x, this is my g, and this is my h.
I'll say this is only true for certain...
values of x near 0.
This inequality holds.
So if I can establish this inequality, which we're taking for a fact, then I
can use the Squeeze Theorem to put limits on all of these.
And now you can see why it's a useful result.
I have no idea how to compute the limit in the middle.
Sin(x) over x, I mean I can't really do any algebra or anything like that.
For those of you who may have seen it, you could use Taylor Series, but
we will not do that.
But with the Squeeze Theorem, the limit is not so bad because what's the
limit as x goes to 0 on the right? Well, it's just the limit as x goes to 0 of 1.
So it's just 1.
On the left, I have the limit as x goes to 0 of cosine of x.
Well, cosine is continuous, we've established this, and its value of 0 is 1,
so the limit is also 1.
So let's look back at the inequality now.
I have 1 is less than or equal to the limit I care about, which is also less
than or equal to 1.
So it's the only way you can be less that or equal to 1 and greater than or
equal to 1.
That's if you're equal exactly to 1.
So we get the result we care about.
So this is incredibly standard in a classical and it's really one that's worth
committing to memory.
In order to really understand why it's true, we would need to show this
initial inequality.
That cosine is less than or equal to sin(x) over x, which is less than or
equal to 1, but that's not so easy.
That's something that I'm not going to show you because it requires a bit
of geometry, but it's certainly within your capabilities.
You know, just wake up one morning, have a nice cup of coffee, spend
half an hour reading it, and I think it'll make sense.
But for us, the really important aspect of this calculus is to show what you
can do with the Squeeze Theorem.
Once I have this initial inequality on functions, I can just throw some limits
on and really compute something pretty amazing.
