We'll begin our discussion of derivatives with the notion of a tangent line.
This will help us give a geometric formulation so we can get a mental
picture of what's going on before we introduce mathematical definitions.
Why do we talk about tangent lines? Why are they related to derivatives?
Well, it turns out that the derivative will give us the slope of a tangent line.
So let's start by discussing what we're talking about.
So we say a line is tangent to a function if it intersects it only once.
So the picture that you should have in your mind is something like this.
So at this point I can draw this line here that just glances the function and
then doesn't intersect it again.
Now I am making a simplification here, which is that the line is allowed to
intersect multiple times but only outside of a small interval.
Right, so what I really want to be considering with tangent lines is, maybe
this is a good example.
If I look at this point at the bottom here, this line is tangent but this line is
not because it passes through two points.
So I'm really looking for lines that only hit the function one time.
It turns out that I can characterize these tangent lines in terms of a
quantity called the derivative.
So how can I construct this tangent line? Well, it's not so obvious what
sort of properties a tangent line would have.
Mainly what I care about is its slope.
Right, because how do I write a line? I write it as y equal mx plus b.
So this is the slope and this is the y intercept.
I can easily get the y intercept and the slope is a little bit trickier.
So what you can do is start with something that we can compute easily
and try and work our way to getting to tangent lines.
So this is this general mathematical principle that one way to attack a
difficult problem is to start with something simpler and try and turn the
simple problem into the hard one.
So in this case what we do is we consider tangent lines as the limit of
secant lines.
So a secant line is allowed to intersect the function twice.
So if I'm looking for this blue tangent line here, one way to do it is to say
fix this point and start looking at secant lines going through these two
points.
And notice that as I bring those points closer together the secant lines
become better and better approximations of the tangent line.
And I if I was somehow allowed to bring the two points and the secant line
together completely, I would get the tangent line.
So here's perhaps a slightly more precise picture that I generated in
MATLAB.
So in blue we have the function f of x equals x squared and I'm displaying
it from x equals zero to x equals five.
And I have a secant line that passes through two points, x equals one and
x equals four.
And what I'm going to do is bring these two points together so I can get
an approximation of a tangent line.
So here I've taken the point one and shifted it to the point three and the
point four is still here.
So now the tangent of this secant line intersects the function twice, but it
almost is hard to tell that it's not intersecting it one time.
If you look at this sort of small window here, the function and its tangent
line are very close.
I'm sorry the function and its secant line are very close together.
And you can imagine if I were to continue to bring this point at three
closer to four, the line would be coming very, very close to being tangent.
And here, you know, up to some sort of computer approximation, I've
actually computed the tangent line, so here just intersecting at x equals
four.
So you can think of this as being generated as a limit of secant lines,
where I bring one of the points towards the point where I want the tangent
line to be.
So you're thinking now, okay fine, why did I need calculus to do this? This
was all basically geometry and talking about lines, but I'm doing a limit
process.
I'm allowing one object to get very close to another one and asking what
happens.
This is exactly a limit.
We spent the first module discussing limits and I mentioned that this was
foundational to what we're going to do in the future, and this is one of the
first places where we'll see this.
In order to make this idea precise and mathematically justified, I need to
introduce a notion of limit.
So let's take a look.
So the slopes of the secant lines are computed, you know, in the classical
way because I have two points, right.
I get two points because the secant line intersects twice, so it's not for
free that I get these two points.
It's because I have a secant line.
And then of course I can just find the slope, right.
Rise over run.
So f of b minus f of a over b minus a.
Right, so this is rise over run, delta y over delta x, I mean there's a million
ways to say this, but I'm gonna say it as f of b minus f of a over b minus a.
So to go back to compute the slope of the secant line here, I would do f of
four minus f of three divided by four minus three.
So what happens as a goes to b? I have the limit as a goes to b of f of b
minus f of a over b minus a.
I have a limit that's not easy to evaluate, right, because if I just plug in a
equals b, I get zero over zero, so I need to be careful.
And that's why we spent a bit of time developing these limit techniques for
when you have indeterminate forms, because the definition of the
derivative is going to look like this and will be indeterminate, zero over
zero.
But the key idea is, I can develop this idea of slope of a tangent line as a
limiting process of something simple, of slopes of secant lines.
What happens as I take the limit? I get the definition of the derivative
which is where we're going to go now.

