Having discussed tangent lines as a motivation, we will now get into
defining the derivative formulae.
The derivative is one of the central objects of calculus.
Really one of the two.
Limits of the foundation but we want them to be able to study derivatives
and integrals.
So these are derivatives which we will do in this module and module three
and then their counterpart integrals.
And measures the rate of change of a function.
But in an instantaneous sense.
That is not the rate of change over some interval which we don't need
calculus to compute but the rate of change at a given time so you can
imagine the derivative is sort of like the speedometer in your car.
As you're driving, it tells you how fast I'm going right now.
Imagine you had a speedometer for any kind of function.
This is the derivative.
So there's two different things we have to do with derivatives.
We have establish the mathematics, the theory.
What is the derivative, how do I compute it? What kind of tricks can I use?
What kinds of theoretical properties does it satisfy? This will be module
two.
In module three, we will use it do problem solving.
We will use it solve rate of change problems and related to some
problems in physics.
We can also use it to help us plot functions more accurately than without
derivatives.
So we will focus on those types of applications and problems in module
three.
So let's recall what we were discussing in module sub­module 2.1.
Slopes of secant lines are easy to compute.
All I need is two points and I can find the slope of a line passing through
those two points in the classical way.
If I have a line passing through a, f of a, b, f of b, so just note that these
will be given because I consider secant lines.
So I get these two points for free.
So for example here would be a, f of a and here would b, f of b.
I have these two points and I create a line passing through them.
How do I know the slope of a line passing through two points? This is the
seventh grade stuff.
This is f of b, minus f of a over b minus a.
So we haven't done any calculus yet.
We're just refreshing our minds for things we already have studied in our
lives.
But now I want to understand the slope of the tangent line.
I need a limit.
I need to take this ratio and let b run towards a.
Now let's see here, but the idea is that if I plug in directly I get a problem
because I get zero over zero, which is indeterminant.
So now we will look at the formal definition of a derivative.
Let f of x be a function.
I don't assume as continuous but it will turn out to be necessary.
The derivative of f at x is defined to be function, f five of x.
So this is the first derivative of f of x.
If you don't say first, people won't know what you mean.
This is equal to the limit as age goes to zero of the following ratio.
F of x plus h minus f of x over h.
So again what happens if I plug in? I get plugging in h equal zero.
I get f of x plus zero minus f of x over zero so I'm dividing by zero, bad.
In general there's nothing good that's gonna happen from dividing by
zero.
At best, I do some algebra and things work out.
So I get f of x minus f of x over zero so zero over zero so indeterminant.
Now I claim that this derivative definition is really just a rephrasing of what
we had with the secant lines.
In that case, I looked at the limit of the slopes of these secant lines as a
one to b.
Here I don't have b minus a in the denominator.
I have h.
So let just note that if I want to compute the limit, as a goes to b, of f of b
minus f of a over b minus a I can do what will wind up being a standard
trick in calculus, which is to make a substitution.
So I'll let b minus a be equal to h.
And then what do I get? This gives me if a is going to b, then b minus a is
going to zero.
So I switch limit as a goes to b to the limit as h goes to zero.
Because a minus b, a goes to b so a minus b goes to zero.
And then this division by h replaces the division by b minus a.
Then what happens in the numerator? F of b here and f of b plus h.
Maybe it would've been easier to switch that to a minus b but it is the
same up to a sign.
So with the substitution I basically see how I can go from the limit
definition or rather the limit that comes out of taking limits of secant line
slopes to this derivative definition where I am no longer taking b to a but
I'm taking some related quantity h to zero.
So just wanted to give you some sense of how to make this connection
that what we were doing with secant lines can be related to what we're
doing with derivatives now so I sort of sketched out how to show that
these things are the same but it would helpful to really go home and go
back and forth between them in your own handwriting to see that really
we're doing the same thing.
Even though these definitions look different.
That even though this appears different from this they're really related
after make this substitution here.
So one point to notice is that the derivative is defined in terms of a limit.
Hence why limit is so foundational for us.
And of course I've said this several times if I plug in h equals zero things
don't work out so well.
I get the indeterminant form zero over zero and there's really nothing I
can do with that without having specific access to the function f.
Without being able to do some algebra.
What we will wind up doing especially in sub­module 2.4 is developing
techniques and tricks for computing derivatives as standard functions.
Because working with this limit definition is not always very convenient.
What we're going to do now though is actually do that.
We're going to look at a couple of examples of computing derivatives I
would say by hand that is without any sort of standard rules.
If you've seen some calculus before or you're watching my videos for not
the first time we're gonna compute some derivatives now without the
power rule, or the product rule, the chain rule or anything like that.
We're gonna do everything from first principles.
So let's start with a simple function, f of x equals x.
First order polynomial.
Let's compute the derivative.
So f time of x is defined to be the limit as x goes to zero.
Of f of x plus h.
I'm sorry, h goes to zero.
Divided by h.
So how can I compute this? Well I have the formula for f.
So I can actually compute exactly what f of x plus h is.
It is x plus h.
And then f of x is x.
This is the key point.
In order to go from this abstract definition to a concrete one, I need to
apply the rule for f but once I do that things are beautiful.
Because now I have this x cancels with this x and I just end up with the
limit as h goes to zero of h over h.
So is this indeterminant if I plug it indirectly? Yes I get zero over zero but
it is kind of indeterminant in a way that's a little stupid because I can see
exactly what the limit is equal to.
At h equals zero, this is indeterminant but when I'm computing the limit I
can cancel the h's.
And I get the limit as h goes to zero of just one.
What is the limit as h goes to zero of one? Its just one.
So well done.
We've computed our first derivative by hand.
All we had to do was go to the definition and plug in the rule for f.
In this case, it was rather simple because f was just a degree one
polynomial.
Now we're going to look at a degree two polynomial but we will have to be
a bit more careful.
So here lets let f of x be equal to x squared.
We're going to compute f prime of x.
So from the definition this is the limit.
As h goes to zero of f of x plus h, minus f of x, divided by h and I compute
this again by evaluating f.
Okay so what do I end up with here? I've x plus h quantity squared minus
x squared divided by h.
So to make this clear, I'll actually expand the first term in the numerator.
I'll foil x plus h squared so how's that work? I'll get an x squared plus two
times x times h plus h squared.
That's what I get from foiling x plus h squared minus x squared over h.
And now I'm going to again cancel some things out.
It won't be quite as simple as it was when we just had f of x equals x, but
it will work out as almost as nicely.
So I can cancel these x squareds and get the limits as h goes to zero of
two x h plus x squared over h.
How about what can I cancel now? Well everything has at least one copy
of h in it.
So I can cancel this h in the denominator with an h here and one of the
h's and h squared.
h squared divided by h is h, not one.
So what I get is the limit as h goes to zero of two x plus h.
Now last time, I evaluated the limit of the limit as h goes to zero of one.
This was independent of h.
It didn't appear anywhere.
Here h appears as a plus h.
So when I apply this limit, I just get two x plus zero because h has been
sent to zero so I get two x.
Okay quite a bit of work to compute this one derivative.
So the derivative of f of x equals x squared is two x.
Its rate of change is increasing as x increases, which makes sense
because the quadratic gets steeper and steeper as you go along that.
Keep in mind how difficult it was to compute this derivative.
Imagine having to do this every time for every new function you were
given.
Go to the limit definition plug in the rule for f and try and find some
algebraic tricks and tools to be able to help yourself.
Not what you want to do.
It is important.
I'm a mathematician so I truly believe this.
It is important to know the fundamentals.
To be able to look at the definition try to understand what it is saying.
Make sure it is written the right way to capture what you want to say.
But for the club exam, we will develop other ways of doing derivatives.
We will develop some basic rules and tools that help us so we don't have
to go to the limit definition every time.
This will be the content of our biggest sub­module.
