Having introduced the formal definition of the derivative, we'll talk now
about how the derivative relates to rates of change.
So let's recall our formulation of the tangent line and the secant line.
The slope of the secant line was f of b minus f of a over b minus a.
So it was the difference between the change in the ratio between the
change in the outputs and the change in the inputs.
We can think of this as the average rate of change of the function f on the
interval ab.
Why does this make sense? Well, in the numerator, I have f of b minus f
of a.
So where do I end versus where do I start? And I divide that by b minus
a.
So how far did I go? All right, the distance between my start a and the
end b.
All right, so this can be thought of as the end output and the start output,
so that the numerator is the change in output and that this is your end and
this is your, well, it's the end input.
And this is your start input.
So I'll write it again as delta y over delta x.
This is sort of a more simple way to think about it, rise over run.
But in this sense the slope of the secant line is the average rate of
change on the interval.
Now, what we've done so far is to say well, what happens if I take a to b?
What happens if I take these slopes of the secant line and start bringing a
towards b so that I get something approaching the slope of a tangent
line? We formulated this as a limit problem and related it to the derivative.
But now I'm interpreting the secant line slope as the average rate of
change on an interval.
So what happens as I let this interval shrink? What happens to this
average rate of change? Well, let's write b equals a plus h.
So h here, we simply use algebra to compute as b minus a measures
how close a and b are.
As h gets smaller, a and b become closer together.
Then I can say that the average rate of change of f on the interval a
comma a plus h is just f of a plus h minus f of a over h.
All right, so, how do I get this? Well, the definition would be f of a plus h
minus f of a divided by a plus h minus a.
So the numerator is what we expect, but the denominator simplifies to h.
So all I've done is rewritten b as a plus h.
And rewritten what the corresponding average rate of change is.
But now this looks exactly like the formula for a derivative.
Right, all I have to do in this case is take h to zero, and I get the limit
definition of a derivative.
Right.
So what does this correspond to in terms of our average rate of change?
Letting h go to zero shrinks the size of the interval we average over.
So if I started with the interval a and here's a plus h, as h goes to zero,
this right endpoint starts to shift to the left.
So that eventually I'm going to be thinking there's no interval left at all, it's
just the point a.
Right, so just to summarize, this shrinks the interval in question to be
basically a by itself.
So what sense does this have? Instead of talking about the average rate
of change over some interval, I'm now talking about the rate of change
just at the point a.
So the interval is gone.
The limiting process has removed everything that wasn't just the point a.
So now I have what we call instantaneous rate of change.
Right, so this is versus average rate of change on an interval.
Right, and this is just by observing that when I take the limit as h goes to
zero of f of a plus h minus f of a over h, this is by definition, f prime of a.
So this is the power of calculus.
I can take a quantity that was defined as the average rate of change and
talk about the exact rate of change in a point.
And I did this through the limit process.
So we saw this with the secant line and we're seeing it again with rate of
change.
And this is basically what calculus does for us.
It let's us go from quantities related to the average something to quantities
related to the instantaneous something.
So it's a strict strengthening of the types of things we can do with
mathematics.
And a useful way to think about derivatives is as instantaneous rates of
change.
The type of argument we've just gone through explains in what sense we
mean this.
So as an exercise, let's compute average and instantaneous rates of
change for some simple functions.
So actually this one's, you know, we've seen from the previous
submodule, this is not always so simple.
So we'll let f of x be equal to x squared.
We'll start by finding the average rate of change on the interval minus two
to two, which is straightforward.
Then we'll compute the instantaneous rate of change at x equals two.
So just to remind you what this function looks like, something like this.
So for the average, I do f of two minus f of negative two over two minus
negative two.
So I get two squared minus negative two squared over four.
So I get four minus four over four, so zero.
Which makes sense, I mean this is the slope of the secant line going
through those two points.
So I get zero.
Now this had no calculus in it.
This was all basic algebra and understanding how to create slopes of
lines given two points.
Now we'll do a little bit of calculus.
We'll pass from the average rate of change to the instantaneous one.
And we do this by taking a derivative.
Well, I know it's equal to f prime of two, but how do I compute this? Well,
we'll see in the next submodule that this is a very straightforward function
to differentiate, which means to take the derivative.
But we don't have that tool yet.
So I guess all we can do is go back to the limit definition.
But we saw in the previous submodule how to compute this derivative.
We went through the exercise of differentiating x squared and we saw the
derivative of f of x equals x squared is two x.
So we saw in previous submodule that f prime of x is equal to two x, so
that tells me f prime of two is equal to four.
So my instantaneous rate of change is four in this case.
All right.
So let's look at a slightly different one.
So here I have f of x equals c times x for some fixed constant c.
So for example, f of x could be four x or negative two x or so on.
So it's some line with slope c.
And I want to start by finding the average rate of change on the interval
and then find the instantaneous rate of change x equals one.
So let's start with the average, so I do f of three minus f of negative one
divided by three minus negative one.
So what's f of three.
Well, it's three times c minus f of minus one, which is negative c, divided
by three plus one.
So I get four c divided by four, so just c.
So the average rate of change is just equal to c.
How about the instantaneous? Well, in this case, I have to take the limit of
f of one plus h minus f of one divided by h.
Plug in f of one plus h is c times one plus h minus c.
My h.
So I get the limit as h goes to zero, so this c times one will cancel with this
minus c, and I get ch over h, the h's cancel.
Finish it here.
Limit as h goes to zero of c, so just c.
Notice that the instantaneous rate of change happens to be equal to the
average rate of change.
So is this a coincidence? No.
In fact, if you go back and look at the argument that I made for why the
average rate of change on the interval minus one to three was equal to c,
you'll see that this would've been true for any choice of interval.
It had nothing to do with the particular choice minus one to three.
Would've exact same technique would've worked for any interval.
So now the question is, I have a function f of x equals c times x.
And its average rate of change on every interval is c.
Its instantaneous rate of change is also equal to c.
Is this special or not? And the answer is it is special.
The only functions that have this property that they're instantaneous rate
of change is equal to their average rate of change are functions that have
this form, or rather, you know, this is, I guess it would be things like cx
plus d for some choice of constant d.
But in general, functions will not have this property, only the most simple
ones have their average rate of change be equal to their instantaneous
rate of change.
You might ask how in the world one could begin to discuss these types of
things? You can actually use integration to make this type of argument
very precise.
For us right now, it's enough to understand that in general the picture is
more complicated.
We saw for our quadratic example that the average rate of change was
different than the instantaneous rate of change.
The general situation is more like the quadratic than it was for f of x
equals c times x.
